
Paper for
http://beyond.wallviz.dk/





"The Future of Exploratory and Explanatory Visualisations"

Keith Andrews, Graz University of Technology
Johanna Pirker, Graz University of Technology
Vedran Sabol, Know-Center, Graz




Abstract
--------

The design of a visualisation invariably depends upon the task(s) and
the target user group it is designed to support. Exploratory and
explanatory visualisations generally require different considerations.
We consider the future of visualisations under this aspect.



Keywords:




1. Introduction
---------------

In order to envision a future of visualisation without desktop
computing, it is beneficial to start by considering future contexts of
use and potential tasks.

Particular applications of visualisation are often classified
according to their purpose: _exploratory_ or _explanatory_ [Ref].
Exploratory visualisation is usually associated with the exploration
and analysis of an unfamiliar dataset in search of insights.
Exploratory visualisations are typically used by trained experts in
visual analysis, often with powerful computing hardware and large
(sometimes multiple) screens.

In contrast to exploratory visualisation, explanatory visualisation is
typically used to convey one or more insights into a dataset _once_
the insights have been discovered. A typical example might be an
interactive graphic prepared for an online newspaper, perhaps with an
interactive storyline snychronised to a series of predetermined views
of the dataset to illustrate particular aspects of the narative.
Explanatory visualisations are sometimes used to convey a particular
perspective on a dataset, according to the underlying intentions of
the author. If it is easy to lie with statistics, it is even easier
with an explanatory visualisation!

Computing hardware is becoming increasingly powerful and ever smaller
with decreasing power requirements. At the same time, the desktop
metaphor and its WIMP (windows, icons, menus, pointer) [Ref] style of
interaction, predominant for over 3 decades, now has some serious
competition. Much smaller displays (than desktop monitors) and much
larger displays are both increasingly more commonplace. Augmented
reality and immersive technologies offer further possibilities for
output to a user. Touch interfaces (characteristic of smartphones and
tablets), gestures (Wii and Kinect), and voice (Siri and Android) all
provide alternative means of user input.




2. Future Exploratory Visualisation
-----------------------------------

Exploratory visualisation today is typically performed by trained,
highly skilled, expert analysts. We do not expect this to change. The
displays used today are typically large and visually dense. We do not
expect this to change either.

On the visual analyst's desktop, very high resolution displays, or
banks of several connected displays next to one another [SMM2013] are
possible now; the descreasing cost of corresponding graphics cards and
monitors will see this trend continue. We would expect, however, the
keyboard and mouse to continue to be the main mode of interaction with
these systems.

Some researchers have experimented with room-sized display walls
[LHWT2005]. In addition to the more obvious problems of synchronising
output to multiple tiled displays, there is the additional problem of
how to enable user interaction with such displays. Since the
traditional mouse and keyboard proved insufficient, researchers have
experimented with gesture and voice input [SBA2007].

From their beginnings with the CAVE [CSD1993], virtual enviroments
such as the DAVE [LSF2008] have been adapted for exploratory
visualisation applications. In a prototype at Graz University of
Technology, a virtual world representing the city of Graz has been
built, in which dust clouds are used to represent location-based
air-pollution statistics. The density of the clouds rendered in
different city parts represents the mean concentration at the specific
location. The multi-user capability of such recent virtual
environments allows the distinction between exploratory and
explanatory visualisation to be blurred: an expert can collaboratively
guide one or more visitors through the scenario.






3. Future Explanatory Visualisation
-----------------------------------

Whilst we expect exploratory visualisations to move largely towards
larger displays, explanatory visualisations are spreading to both
larger and smaller displays simultaneously. The confluence of data
journalism and responsive web design has led the charge to spread
information graphics and explanatory visualisations to the general
public. Newspapers such as the Boston Globe, New York Times, and the
Guardian are actively developing explanatory visualisations which work
well within the confines of a smartphone screen, as well as on more
traditional desktop displays.

In the context of public displays, we may see the introduction of
wall-sized explanatory visualisations. For example, a wall-sized
visualisation of the real-time locations of public transport vehicles
such as Linz Fährt [Ref] could easily be realised for a bus station
foyer.  How could the public interact with such a visualisation: maybe
smartphones could be enhanced with a modified laser pointer (carrying
some kind of id?), so that a viewer can point at a particular bus and
call up its details?

Explanatory visualisations and simulations are already being used
inside virtual environments to help teach physics students about
phenomena like Faraday’s Law [Ref]. Other applications of
visualisations of 3d phenomena can easily be envisaged.





4. Concluding Remarks
---------------------


To conclude, we see the future of visualisation as increasingly
diverse. Displays will become both larger and smaller. Novel methods
of interaction will be introduced to visualisations. And consideration
of the purpose of a visualisaion will continue to drive the best
design for a specific task and user group.






References
----------

[CSD1993]
  Carolina Cruz-Neira, Daniel J. Sandin, and Thomas A. DeFanti;
  "Surround-Screen Projection-Based Virtual Reality:
  The Design and Implementation of the CAVE";
  Proc. SIGGRAPH'93
  http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/166117.166134


[LHWT2005]
  Kai Li, Matthew Hibbs, Grant Wallace, and Olga Troyanskaya
  "Dynamic Scalable Visualization for Collaborative
  Scientific Applications";
  Proc. 19th IEEE International Parallel and Distributed
  Processing Symposium, 2005 (IPDPS 2005)
  http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/IPDPS.2005.183


[LSF2008]
  M. Lancelle, V. Settgast, and D. Fellner;
  "Definitely Affordable Virtual Environment";
  Video at IEEE Virtual Reality 2008
  http://www.cgv.tugraz.at/dave


[SBA2007]
  Daniel Stødle, John Markus Bjørndalen, and Otto J. Anshus;
  "A System for Hybrid Vision- and Sound-Based Interaction with Distal
  and Proximal Targets on Wall-Sized, High-Resolution Tiled Displays";
  Proc. IEEE International Workshop on HCI 2007,
  Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 20 Oct 2007.
  http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-75773-3_7


[SMM2013]
  Roberto Yuri da Silva Franco, Bianchi Serique Meiguins,
  and Aruanda Simões Meiguins;
  "PRISMA-MDE – Information visualization Environment
  for Multiple Display";
  Proc. 2013 Conference on Information Visualisation,
  July 2013, London.
  http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/IV.2013.18


